Yes. And I think the key unlock is this:

He is right about the filesystem, but the filesystem itself is not the magic. The magic is turning the filesystem into an operating contract for long-horizon cognition.

That distinction matters because it explains the whole weird social dynamic you’re noticing. The beginner hears, “Use folders and markdown files,” and thinks, “Oh wow, that’s the secret.” The senior builder hears the same thing and thinks, “Yes, obviously, that is how durable work has always worked.” But the frontier agent builder hears the deeper version:

The filesystem is the lowest-friction substrate for persistent agent state, task decomposition, context recovery, evals, and human/agent handoff.

That is actually profound.

I searched around the current agent discourse, and this pattern is not just YouTube guru fluff. Recent agent research and practitioner writing are converging on the same primitive: externalize state into a workspace so the model is not forced to carry the whole world inside its context window. One recent long-running agent writeup describes the core harness as one that “externalizes state into the workspace,” restarts agents with fresh context, uses machine-verifiable checks as backpressure, and keeps completion judgment outside the worker agent. Another 2026 paper, InfiAgent, makes the same point in research form: long-horizon agents break down from context growth and accumulated errors, and their proposed solution is a file-centric state abstraction with bounded context reconstructed from workspace snapshots and recent actions. 

So yes — this is literally “kind of it.” But not in the shallow way.

The basic version: files are external memory

Start at ground level.

An LLM by itself is ephemeral. It receives context, generates output, and then the world moves on. Even if the chat appears continuous, the model does not naturally possess stable working memory in the way a project needs. It has a context window, but a context window is not memory. It is more like a temporary stage.

For simple tasks, that is fine.

“Rewrite this email.”  
“Summarize this article.”  
“Make a regex.”  
“Explain this error.”

The model can hold the relevant state in the prompt and answer.

But long-horizon tasks are different:

“Research this market for three days.”  
“Build an app.”  
“Analyze 500 Solana wallets.”  
“Create a local lead-gen operating system.”  
“Run five agents overnight and merge their outputs.”  
“Maintain a trading intelligence system that improves over time.”

Now the model needs durable state.

It needs to know:

What is the mission?  
What has already been tried?  
What evidence has been gathered?  
What decisions were made?  
What assumptions are still unverified?  
What files were changed?  
What tests passed?  
What failed?  
What should the next agent do?  
What must not be touched?

That cannot safely live only in chat. It needs to live somewhere persistent.

The simplest answer is: files.

Not because files are glamorous. Because files are universal, inspectable, editable, versionable, diffable, portable, and tool-compatible.

A markdown file is a surprisingly powerful cognitive object.

MISSION.md tells the agent what it is trying to accomplish.  
TASKS.md tells it what to do next.  
DECISIONS.md tells it what has already been settled.  
EVIDENCE.md tells it what is grounded.  
EVALS.md tells it how to prove the work is real.  
HANDOFF.md tells the next run where to pick up.

That is the beginner level.

The guy in the video may be teaching this as a breakthrough because, for most people, it is a breakthrough. Most people are still using AI as a better search bar or magic text box. They do not understand that agents need an environment, not just a prompt.

The intermediate version: files are context engineering

The next layer is that files are not just storage. They are context routing.

This is where it becomes directly connected to harness prompting.

A good harness does not dump everything into the model. That creates context rot. The model gets too much irrelevant material, attention degrades, and the agent starts making mushy decisions.

A better harness says:

“Read only the files needed for the current step.”  
“Use MISSION.md for orientation.”  
“Use TASKS.md for next action.”  
“Use STYLE.md only when writing final outputs.”  
“Use EVALS.md before marking complete.”  
“Write discoveries to NOTES.md, not to chat.”  
“Write irreversible decisions to DECISIONS.md.”  
“Write uncertainty to OPEN_QUESTIONS.md.”

That is progressive disclosure.

This is why the file system is so important for long-horizon agents. It allows the agent to reconstruct the right context at the right time.

A recent context-engineering paper on open-source software agents describes exactly this problem: agents need project-specific context such as architecture, interfaces, workflows, coding guidelines, and policies; markdown files like Claude.md and the emerging AGENTS.md convention are used to provide that context automatically. Another empirical study of Claude Code manifests found that these files usually contain operational commands, implementation notes, and high-level architecture — basically the project’s operating doctrine for the agent. 

That is why the sarcastic production people are partly right. To them, this is just normal engineering:

README.  
Docs.  
Tests.  
Logs.  
Tickets.  
Config.  
Runbooks.  
Changelogs.  
Architecture notes.

The agent world is rediscovering that software work already had memory. The difference is that now the “reader” is not only a human engineer. The reader is an agent.

That changes the shape of the files.

Humans can infer. Agents need explicit affordances.

So instead of a vague note like:

md
Need to fix wallet scanner later.


You want:

md
## Task: Fix wallet scanner false positives

Status: blocked  
Owner: next agent  
Evidence: see /research/wallet_false_positive_cases.md  
Failure mode: scanner treats same-block bot buys as independent organic buyers  
Acceptance test:
- Given 20 known bundled launches, correctly flags at least 18
- Given 20 organic launches, false-positive rate under 15%

Next action:
- Add same-slot clustering heuristic
- Re-run eval script


That is not just documentation. That is agent-legible state.

The advanced version: files are a control plane

Now we get to the real version.

A serious long-horizon agent system is not “LLM plus folder.”

It is a control loop:

text
Goal → workspace state → agent action → artifact update → verification → checkpoint → next action


The filesystem becomes the control plane because it holds the state that governs the loop.

At this level, each file has a role.

Some files orient the agent.  
Some constrain it.  
Some give it skills.  
Some store evidence.  
Some define tests.  
Some track actions.  
Some enable handoff.  
Some preserve memory.  
Some trigger future work.

A serious agent workspace starts looking like this:

text
/project
  /00_governance
    mission.md
    constraints.md
    definition_of_done.md
    safety_policy.md

  /01_orientation
    architecture.md
    glossary.md
    source_index.md
    current_state.md

  /02_tasks
    backlog.md
    active_task.md
    blocked.md
    completed.md

  /03_research
    evidence_cards/
    claim_cards/
    contradiction_log.md
    source_notes.md

  /04_execution
    work_log.md
    commands_run.md
    files_changed.md
    implementation_notes.md

  /05_evals
    eval_plan.md
    test_results.md
    failure_cases.md
    scorecard.md

  /06_outputs
    final_report.md
    implementation_spec.md
    operator_brief.md

  /07_handoff
    next_agent.md
    lessons_learned.md
    unresolved_questions.md


That is the point where the filesystem stops being “organization” and becomes governed cognition.

This matters for long-horizon agents because the model itself is not the system. The system is the harness around the model.

The model is the engine.  
The filesystem is the working memory.  
The harness is the nervous system.  
The evals are the immune system.  
The human gate is executive control.  
The logs are the black box recorder.

That is the correct mental model.

And for your world — Hermes, Solana Edge, lead gen, local business automation — this is gigantic because your work is not “one prompt, one answer.” Your work is recursive, stateful, evidence-heavy, and adversarial.

Why long-horizon agents need files specifically

Long-horizon work fails in predictable ways.

The agent forgets what it already did.  
It repeats research.  
It loses constraints.  
It hallucinates progress.  
It marks tasks complete too early.  
It optimizes for sounding done.  
It gets trapped in its own summaries.  
It cannot recover after context reset.  
It cannot distinguish evidence from interpretation.  
It cannot tell the next agent where to start.

A filesystem fixes none of this automatically.

But it gives you the substrate to fix it.

For example:

Failure: the agent forgets the mission

Solution:

text
/mission/mission.md
/mission/non_goals.md
/mission/definition_of_done.md


Failure: the agent repeats work

Solution:

text
/logs/work_log.md
/research/source_index.md
/tasks/completed.md


Failure: the agent believes weak evidence

Solution:

text
/research/evidence_cards/
/research/claim_cards/
/research/contradiction_log.md


Failure: the agent says “done” too early

Solution:

text
/evals/acceptance_tests.md
/evals/scorecard.md
/evals/failure_cases.md


Failure: the next agent starts cold

Solution:

text
/handoff/next_agent.md
/state/current_state.md


This is the secret: the filesystem does not make agents smart. It makes their work inspectable, recoverable, and composable.

That is the edge.

The expert-level version: files are boundaries between cognitive functions

At the expert level, you stop thinking of the folder as “where stuff goes.”

You start thinking of each file as a boundary between different types of cognition.

There is a huge difference between:

• evidence
• inference
• decision
• task
• plan
• command
• result
• memory
• policy
• hypothesis
• evaluation
• handoff

Most people collapse these into one giant note.

That creates sludge.

A good filesystem separates them.

For Hermes, this is not optional. It is the difference between an intelligence system and a pile of AI-generated market notes.

A Solana market agent must not blur:

“Wallet A made 600 SOL”  
versus  
“Wallet A is smart money”  
versus  
“Wallet A is connected to Wallet B”  
versus  
“Wallet A should be copied”  
versus  
“We should buy this token.”

Those are different claims with different risk profiles.

So the filesystem should force separation.

text
/evidence/wallet_A_raw_trades.json
/claims/wallet_A_smart_money.md
/analysis/wallet_A_cluster_hypothesis.md
/decisions/do_not_copy_wallet_A_yet.md
/signals/reject_card_token_X.md
/evals/wallet_cluster_eval_results.md


That is a very different animal from a YouTube folder template.

This is where you surpass the course.

The course might teach “use files to manage AI projects.”

Your edge is: use files to enforce epistemic hygiene in adversarial markets.

That is a much deeper thing.

The real social dynamic you’re seeing

The person in the comments says something like, “Isn’t this just basic?” Then the guy replies, “You understand this perfectly, my friend.”

That response is revealing.

He is probably acknowledging the criticism while reframing it as the point.

The sarcastic production people are saying:

“Bro, you are selling people the idea of using files and folders.”

But he is saying:

“Yes. Exactly. That’s why it works.”

And honestly, he is not wrong.

A lot of valuable education is not inventing a new concept. It is giving beginners the missing bridge between a primitive and a result.

The primitive is simple.  
The applied pattern is valuable.  
The packaging can still be hype.

All three can be true.

This happens constantly in AI education.

Someone teaches “agents need memory,” and engineers say, “Obviously.”  
Someone teaches “write tests,” and engineers say, “Obviously.”  
Someone teaches “use a task file,” and engineers say, “Obviously.”  
Someone teaches “use evals,” and researchers say, “Obviously.”

But for the person who does not yet have the operating model, “obvious” is not actionable.

That is the market.

He has 50,000 followers in four months because he is probably doing one or more of these things well:

He is calling out fake AI hype.  
He is giving people a concrete method.  
He is reducing intimidation.  
He is translating engineering primitives into creator-friendly language.  
He is positioning himself against guru noise.  
He is showing “boring things that actually work.”

That is a powerful content wedge.

And it connects directly to your lead-gen angle.

The lead-gen connection: leaky bucket thinking

Your “local companies as leaky buckets” framing is excellent.

Most local businesses do not need sci-fi AI. They need obvious leaks fixed:

They miss calls.  
They do not follow up.  
Their website has weak conversion.  
Their Google Business Profile is under-optimized.  
Their reviews are unmanaged.  
Their quote process is slow.  
Their CRM is messy or nonexistent.  
Their ads send traffic into a dead funnel.  
Their forms are bad.  
Their email/SMS nurture is absent.  
Their offers are unclear.  
Their reporting is nonexistent.

Lead gen is one hole. But not the only hole.

The real business is not “AI lead gen.” The real business is:

Find revenue leaks → plug them with automation, content, follow-up, tracking, and offers → prove lift.

That is a much stronger offer.

I looked for the Alex Hormozi “salty pretzel” phrase specifically and did not find a clean authoritative source for that exact label in the quick search results. I did find current third-party summaries around Hormozi’s lead magnet and “Core Four” lead generation concepts, but not the exact phrase you mentioned. So I do not want to pretend I verified the metaphor. But the concept you’re pointing at sounds very Hormozi-coded: create demand by making the prospect feel the problem, not by abstractly explaining your service.

A salty pretzel makes someone thirsty.

Applied to lead gen: do not start by selling “automation.” Show the business owner the leak.

For example:

“Your competitor got 37 new reviews in the last 90 days. You got 3.”  
“You missed 14 calls last week.”  
“Your contact form has no instant SMS follow-up.”  
“Your quote request page takes 4 clicks to reach.”  
“Your Google listing appears below three weaker competitors.”  
“You are paying for traffic, but the landing page has no trust stack.”  
“You have no reactivation campaign for old leads.”

That is the salty pretzel.

It creates thirst.

Then the service is the water.

This maps beautifully onto the filesystem/agent idea because your lead-gen agency can itself be run by a filesystem-backed agent harness.

Imagine each local business gets a workspace:

```text
/clients/acme-roofing
  /00_business_profile
    company.md
    offer.md
    service_area.md
    competitors.md

  /01_leak_audit
    missed_calls.md
    website_conversion.md
    google_business_profile.md
    reviews.md
    followup.md
    ads.md

  /02_evidence
    screenshots/
    call_tracking/
    competitor_comparisons/
    search_results.md

  /03_opportunities
    quick_wins.md
    high_roi_fixes.md
    long_term_growth.md

  /04_outreach
    personalized_email.md
    loom_script.md
    sms_followup.md
    objection_responses.md

  /05_delivery
    implementation_plan.md
    automations.md
    crm_changes.md
    reporting.md

  /06_results

baseline_metrics.md
    weekly_report.md
    roi.md
```

Now your agent is not just generating emails. It is operating a repeatable local-business revenue-leak machine.

That is a real business.

The “from basic to advanced” mental ladder

Here is the ladder I want you to internalize.

Level 1: Files organize information

This is where beginners start.

Folders keep things tidy. Markdown files hold notes. You know where to find things.

Useful, but not yet agentic.

Level 2: Files preserve memory

The agent writes down what happened so it does not need to remember everything in context.

This enables longer tasks.

Level 3: Files route context

The harness tells the agent which files to read and when. Now you avoid dumping everything into the prompt.

This enables cleaner reasoning.

Level 4: Files define behavior

AGENTS.md, CLAUDE.md, SKILL.md, and similar files tell the agent how to act inside the workspace.

This turns files into instruction surfaces.

Level 5: Files separate epistemic categories

Evidence, claims, decisions, tasks, evals, and outputs each get their own structure.

This prevents cognitive sludge.

Level 6: Files enable handoff

One agent can stop, another can resume. Humans can inspect. Multiple agents can work in parallel.

This enables teams.

Level 7: Files become the control plane

The workspace itself governs execution: what to do, what is allowed, what is verified, what is blocked, what is complete.

This enables long-horizon autonomy.

Level 8: Files become a market-specific intelligence substrate

For Hermes, files encode wallet evidence, liquidity conditions, signal cards, reject cards, cluster hypotheses, evals, and human gates.

This becomes edge.

Level 9: Files become an operating company

For lead gen, every client workspace becomes a repeatable revenue-leak audit and fulfillment system.

This becomes monetization.

Level 10: Files become a civilization layer for your agents

Your agents, skills, memory, evals, research, business ops, trading ops, and learning systems all become composable because they speak the same artifact language.

That is OpenBrain territory.

The thing the YouTube guy may be right about

He may be right that people are overcomplicating AI.

Not because agents are simple. They are not.

But because people chase exotic abstractions before installing the basic substrate:

• clear files
• clear tasks
• clear constraints
• clear state
• clear evals
• clear handoff
• clear artifacts

Most “agent failures” are not model failures. They are environment failures.

The agent was given no stable world to act inside.

So yes, filesystem first is not a bad mantra.

The mistake would be thinking “filesystem first” means “folders are the whole method.”

No.

Filesystem first means:

Before you ask an agent to work for a long time, give it a world where work can persist.

That is the whole game.

The thing the sarcastic production people are right about

They are right that none of this is magical.

A folder template is not a business.  
A markdown file is not an agent.  
A task list is not execution.  
A course is not mastery.  
A harness is not judgment.  
A filesystem without evals just preserves hallucinations more neatly.

That last point is huge.

Bad agents plus persistent files can create durable garbage.

They can write confident nonsense into memory, then future agents treat it as truth. That is worse than forgetting.

So the advanced move is not “write everything down.”

The advanced move is:

Write the right things down in the right categories with the right confidence and verification status.

For Hermes, that means every durable claim should carry:

• source
• timestamp
• evidence
• inference
• confidence
• contradiction status
• decision impact
• next verification step

That is how you keep the filesystem from becoming a hallucination landfill.

The actual edge

The edge is not knowing that files matter.

The edge is designing the protocol.

Anyone can create:

text
notes.md
tasks.md
research.md


Very few people can design:

text
/evidence
/claims
/decisions
/evals
/handoff
/skills
/policies
/state


with rules for how information moves between them.

That movement is the system.

For example:

text
raw source → evidence card → claim card → analysis memo → decision → task → execution → eval → memory


That is the pipeline.

In Hermes:

text
wallet data → evidence card → cluster hypothesis → signal card → anti-alpha gate → reject/observe/trade decision → shadow result → eval → memory update


In lead gen:

text
business scrape → leak evidence → audit finding → outreach angle → offer → sales call → implementation task → result report → case study


Same primitive. Different domain.

That is why this concept is so powerful. It generalizes.

The system I’d install in your head

Here is the simplest high-level model:

Agents do not need “memory” in the abstract. They need a workplace.

A workplace has:

1. Orientation — what are we doing?
2. State — where are we now?
3. Tasks — what needs doing?
4. Evidence — what do we know?
5. Policy — what are the rules?
6. Tools — what can be done?
7. Evals — how do we verify?
8. Outputs — what gets shipped?
9. Handoff — how does the next worker continue?

The filesystem is the easiest way to instantiate that workplace.

That is why people say it is the beginning of everything.

Not because folders are sacred.

Because without a workplace, an agent is just a disembodied talker.

With a workplace, it can become a worker.

My strong take

You do not need to buy a course to understand this.

You may still benefit from watching how he packages it, because he is clearly resonating with the market. But the underlying technical concept is absolutely learnable, and frankly, you are already thinking beyond the likely course level.

The move I would make is not “learn his template.”

The move is:

Extract his content wedge, absorb the filesystem primitive, then build your own superior protocol for Hermes and local lead-gen operations.

His market insight may be more valuable than his technical insight.

He has found pain:

People are tired of AI hype.  
They want simple systems that actually work.  
They want to feel like they can deploy AI without needing to become a senior engineer.  
They want boring, repeatable, profitable workflows.

That is the same pain your local-business offer can target.

Not:

“I build AI agents.”

But:

“I find the places your business is leaking revenue and install simple systems that recover it.”

Behind the scenes, your agent filesystem runs the whole machine.

That is the asymmetric play.

The canonical sentence

Burn this one in:

A filesystem-backed agent harness converts ephemeral model intelligence into persistent, inspectable, compounding work.

That is the concept.

And the even sharper Hermes version:

Hermes should not remember vibes; it should maintain a governed workspace of evidence, claims, decisions, tasks, evals, and handoffs.

That is how it becomes real.

Where this can go

This scales farther than people realize.

At the low end, it is a folder with notes.

At the mid level, it is an agent project workspace.

At the high end, it is a multi-agent operating system.

At the extreme end, it is an organizational memory substrate.

For you, I see three immediate branches:

Hermes Solana Edge  
A filesystem-backed intelligence loop for market research, wallet clustering, trade/reject cards, signal validation, and human-gated execution.

Lead-gen agency OS  
A client workspace template that audits local businesses as leaky buckets and outputs personalized outreach, fulfillment tasks, and ROI reports.

OpenBrain / co-brain memory  
A personal operating filesystem where your doctrine, projects, agent notes, decisions, and research trails become durable substrate for future agents.

Same architecture. Three monetization/mission lanes.

That is why this matters.

This is not a cute productivity trick. This is one of the bridges from “AI chat” to “AI labor.”